(lively piano music)
Voiceover: "I will not
make any more boring art."
Voiceover: This is repeated,
over and over again,
down the length of a sheet of paper,
and originally down the length of a wall,
in column after column.
Voiceover: Clearly, this is
like a schoolroom punishment.
"I will remember to do my homework,"
written over, and over, and over again.
Voiceover: We're talking
about a work of art
that was made by an artist
whose name is John Baldessari.
that was made in 1971,
first in the Nova Scotia
College of Art & Design.
Voiceover: This is basically
a form we already know.
We know it as a schoolroom punishment.
How is it transformed into art?
Voiceover: Well, I think
that the idea that it was
in a gallery, that context was
really important to the artist.
He actually has spoken about
how he takes his word images
and makes them on canvas to give
them that frame of reference.
Yeah, this is different than if it
was on a blackboard in a school.
Voiceover: Let's think about
the words for a second,
because it's not, "I will
not speak out in class."
It's, "I will not make
any more boring art."
It's self-punishing.
He's looking at his career and saying,
"I made some bad art, and in the future,
"I'm not going to make any more bad art."
Voiceover: He had apparently
originally written the sentence
in his own private notebook.
That was the genesis of this.
I think it's important to understand this
within the broader context
of his early career.
Baldessari had been taught, I
think like so many art students,
to create, in a kind of
abstract expression, a style.
Voiceover: We're talking
here about Mark Rothko,
about Jackson Pollock,
artists who were making
what I think of as very
serious art in the 1950s.
Voiceover: Well, what this artist did,
was in 1970, to gather
up all of the canvases
that he owned of his own work.
These were abstractions.
There were landscapes.
Then, together with some friends,
and some art students of his,
he brought them to a crematorium,
and he had them burned
like we burn bodies.
Then, he took the ashes,
and he put them in an urn.
This was a way of creating, I
think, a really [stark erupture]
in his career between this
older style and his mature,
much more conceptually oriented work.
Voiceover: There is a way in
which art was painting still,
even in the 1960s.
To make art, you paint it.
In "I will not make any more boring
art," is labeling that as boring,
and saying "I'm going to do
something different going forward."
Voiceover: But, even
using the word "boring"
is hilarious and off limits.
Voiceover: It's true (laughs)
Voiceover: Because in
the serious nomenclature
of the art world, you don't
use words like "boring."
There's a kind of directness
and a kind of humor
that's incorporated in this deep irony.
Voiceover: You can see that as an artist
the real challenge would
be, what is interesting art?
What does it mean to
make art that's sincere,
and engaging, and clever, and new?
Voiceover: It was also about the qualities
of new conceptual art.
If you think about, for
instance, the work that people,
like Sol Lewitt, there's
a kind of cool clarity,
which is also at the same time boring,
although you're not allowed to say that.
So, there's something wonderfully ironic,
but also irreverent about this.
(lively piano music)